the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
so now we go on to the breakdown of the
octet rule so we've established the
octet rule and now we're going to shake
it all up and see its flaws so case one
we're going to consider what happens and
this again is today's handout consider
what happens when you have an odd number
of valence electrons case one alright so
for molecules with an odd number of
electrons odd number of valence
electrons it's not possible for every
atom to have a complete octet that
involves pairing that involves even
numbers of electrons so let's look at an
example of a place where we have an odd
number of valence electrons and this is
our friend CH 3 our methyl group that we
saw a few minutes ago so we can also
write it like this and we can come up
with a lewis structure for our methyl
group so hydrogen remember it only is
bringing one valence electron to the
table there are three hydrogen's Carbon
brings four valence electrons so in sum
we have seven an odd number of electrons
to complete our octets remember hydrogen
is a exception it only needs two it just
has that 1s orbital so we need two
electrons for it for it to be happy
there are three hydrogen's that's six
carbon needs eight so total you need
fourteen to make carbon and hydrogen's
happy so if you consider then how many
bonding electrons you have that's the
number of electrons needed for your
octet minus the number of valence
electrons you have so we get seven
bonding electrons how do you have seven
bonding electrons a bond has two
electrons in it so let's look at that
what do we do well we can put six six is
good put two assign two electrons for
the bond
I mean this carbon and this hydrogen -
between this carbon and this hydrogen -
between this carbon and this hydrogen
six is good but now what do we do with
the extra one we have seven so we're
just gonna stick that right there on the
carbon so what is this molecule then
well what this molecule is is a radical
species so a radical species is a
molecule with an unpaired electron and
usually radical species are very
reactive bonding electrons don't want to
be unpair they want to be in bonds so
they're highly reactive they're sort of
searching out to either get rid of their
electron to get another electron they're
very very reactive species so radicals
turn out to be very important in human
health and free radicals in biology are
both good and bad so in the bad category
we have the fact that free radicals
damage DNA that leads to mutations and
cancer and death not good and there are
a lot of radical species many of which
involve oxygen oxygen radical species
that can be byproducts and metabolism
common cigarette smoke so they're
natural causes and also man-made causes
of radical species and this is very
harmful but radical species can also be
really good so they're also essential
for life they're signaling agents in the
body radicals are short-lived they're
highly reactive so they're not around
very long
that's the great signaling agent you
want the signal to turn itself off so
you uh you want to have something
short-lived there also essential for
enzyme reactions
we'd have no cell division no growth no
multicellular organisms if it weren't
for radical enzymes and we can use
radical reuse radicals in our body when
we're fighting off illness we generate
radical species or the white blood cells
do to kill invading microbes so we're
using radical defense in our bodies to
fight off illness radicals both good and
bad
so we talked about oxygen radicals a
little bit one other radical species is
nitric oxide and now why don't you
identify for me which of these molecules
is nitric oxide knowing that it's a
radical all right
just 10 more seconds
yeah okay so some of you might have just
known that that molecule is a nitric
oxide but if you had if you had done the
calculation you would have realized that
I know is the only one where you get an
odd number of bonding electrons for
these other molecules you have an even
number and they can't be radical species
with an even number you need an odd
number of bonding electrons to have a
radical species so this is and up this
is nitric oxide n O and what does n O do
so n o is an important signaling
molecule in the body so it activates
something called guanylate cyclase which
is an enzyme which then starts a second
signaling system that involves GTP
forming another signaling agent cyclic
GMP and this causes basal dilation so
scientists were very interested in this
pathway and and they noted that cyclic
GMP can be degraded by an enzyme turning
off this signal and they thought if we
inhibit this enzyme then we can have in
a more continued effect of basal
dilation this could be good for people
who are suffering from chronic disease
that need to get more oxygen to their
lungs that might have emphysema this
could be a very good thing for these
people so they designed an inhibitor for
this but it turned out it didn't work
exactly as they expected it did increase
basal dilation but only in one part of
the body and only for one gender of
individual so this led to the
best-selling pharmaceutical molecule of
all time so a good example of how
science sometimes doesn't take you
exactly where you wanted to go but
nonetheless was highly profitable all
right so nitric oxide and I could tell
you that actually a lot of the early
work on nitric oxide was done at MIT and
for people who came from MIT
so there's a whole just saying no club
here at MIT and if you see this just say
no it's about nitric oxide so just just
to be aware of that okay so now let's do
a lewis structure for this and see what
see this radical species so again we
need an odd number of valence electrons
if it's going to be a radical and that's
what we get so nitrogen has five valence
electrons and oxygen has six so overall
we have eleven to have complete octet
nitrogen needs eight oxygen needs eight
so we need 16 which gives us five
bonding electrons 16-11 that makes it a
radical species and now we can put our
we have six remaining and we can put
everything on so we can put four bonding
electrons in between we have five we can
only put four because you can't have a
bond with just one electron so the fifth
one is why it's a radical species but we
have also six remaining valence
electrons and we can distribute those
around one two three four five six and
that would be our molecule alright so
this is a highly reactive radical
species yeah
yeah that you know I think I actually
was going to calculate whether we could
we could we could use this but that is
in fact where that one is going so that
can be a clicker question maybe for next
time I didn't actually get to try it I
was thinking we can we should calculate
the formal charges and think about where
things are going to go but I didn't do
that for this good question
all right so so let's just look at
another another example let's look at
molecular oxygen for a minute and do and
do this one so you're gonna we're
getting lots of practice with Lewis
structures today all right so we need to
think about valence electrons so we have
6 for oxygen plus 6 so we have 12
valence electrons and we need 8 plus 8
we need 16 then we need to figure out
how many bonding electrons that's going
to be 16 minus 12 or 4 and now we can
assign and so we're going to put first
we'll put first 2 and we have two more
so we're going to assign them we have
two more and we'll put those in so we
have a double bond and then we can think
about whether we have any left and we
had 12 valence electrons now we've used
four so we have eight more that we can
distribute so so we're going to make
some lone pairs here so we can put two
up here a lone pair up here a lone pair
down here one two three four are eight
extra electrons and that looks lovely
everything is happy that seems like a
great structure except for the fact it's
wrong
Lewis structures have failed us so it
turns out that it's a bi radical and
this is really why we live life as we
know it
oxygen there's time before oxygen life
is very different
oxygen came around changed life as we
know it partly because it's a bi radical
it has amazing properties it can do
amazing chemistry it allows us to break
down sugars and make energy and so in
reality oxygen is a bi radical we know
that it is not a double bond as drawn
there this is the structure we have one
bond not a double bond lone pairs but
then we have a single dot over here a
single dot over here that makes it a bi
radical one radical and this oxygen one
radical on that oxygen and we can't
explain this with Lewis structures we
need molecular orbital theory but you're
in luck because that's what we're gonna
talk about on Monday so Monday I'll
explain to you why this is a bi radical
but you're gonna have to wait for them
because we have more problems to address
first we have octet deficient molecules
some of these atoms you know they're
just messing everything up for us okay
but the good news is so octet deficient
molecules incomplete octet there's only
two of them you need to know
boron aluminum there they are just those
two so let's look at boron so we have
boron and three fluorines so we put
boron in the middle three fluorines
around it how come I'm not putting a
fluorine in the middle
Florin is always going to be terminal it
does not want to to be anywhere else
okay so now we can look at part of the
periodic table we see here's boron right
below it aluminum so that helps us
remember those exceptions there right
there and now let's just calculate this
lewis structure and see about the see
about the octet deficiency so normally
we would say boron has three valence
electrons and and fluorine there are
three fluorines it has seven and 24
okay that actually would always be true
but now we're saying boron should one
eight and we'll come back to that
assumption to have complete octet that's
definitely how much who wants to have a
complete octet but doesn't really need a
complete octet fluorines also want eight
that's a total of 32 and now if we
subtract we have eight bonding electrons
so we can assign two per bond first now
we've used six and we have two more so
we have two extras that we can put in
that gives us a double bond we can look
at our extra electrons we had 24 we used
eight now to do bonding so we have 16
left and so we can put two on this
fluorine that has the double bond we can
put six on the fluorine with a single
bond and another six on this fluorine
and that adds up that's great and now we
can assign formal charges and think
about what how good the structure is so
if we do the formal charges let's look
at boron first so it had three valence
electrons it has no lone pairs and it
has half of eight bonding electrons
minus one not bad for a formal charge
what about this fluorine with a double
bond and that's a clicker question I
told you you'd be really good at formal
charges by the end of class today
okay ten more seconds I think we can get
in the 90s
it's killing me all right we have to
keep working on it there's going to be
more like clicker competition Friday
there'll be a formal charge question on
it and by the way it's okay to sit in
groups we've had back-to-back wins of
one recitation I have noted that some of
them sit in a group just saying that is
allowed okay so here we have 7 valence
electrons for fluorine and there were
four lone pair electrons half of four
bonding electrons so we have a plus one
charge there and then let's finish up so
our single bonded fluorines seven minus
six lone pairs for those and they have
one bond so they have half of two
bonding electrons and then there's zero
overall this is a neutral molecule so we
have plus plus one minus one that's a
neutral molecule this all seems good
except that someone did an experiment
and found that all three boron fluorine
bonds were single bonds so again Lewis
structures failed us experiment tells us
it's a single bond and this is in fact
the correct structure here pour boron
has an incomplete octet so it's it does
not have all the electrons but it's
happy with that it's ok with that
because it's one of the exceptions and
if we look at the formal charges for it
now we have boron it had three valence
electrons no lone pairs half of six
bonding electrons three so now it has a
formal charge of zero and all three
fluorines we have seven minus six they
have one bond so
of to bonding electrons they also have a
formal charge of zero so most elements
would not be okay with this but boron
with its three valence electrons thinks
that this is just fine so it's one of
the exceptions and again we wouldn't
have known this except for experimental
data Lewis structures work 90% of the
time but there are some where experiment
tells us that the structure we normally
would have done with our rules of
complete octet stone hold okay and we
can rationalize this by the fact the
formal charges are more favorable on
this molecule one more exception valence
shell expansion this again is not a
property of just any atom it needs to be
elements that have an N what is then
again and stands for principle quantum
number yes
principle you can't forget anything
we're coming back to it we're coming
back to all of it have a principle
quantum number that's equal or greater
than three and what do we know about
things what kind of orbitals do we start
talking about when we have principal
quantum numbers of n that are equal to
or greater than three what happens we
get some D orbitals exactly do u
orbitals I love D orbitals closer to
Thanksgiving we're gonna have a whole
unit where we're talking about D
orbitals we save that for really special
occasion I love D orbitals D orbitals
allow for all sorts of craziness to
happen including valence shell expansion
so this is most common when the central
atom is large and it has a bunch of
little small electronegative atoms
around it and transition metals with
their D orbitals they like this and
other things with D orbitals are cool
with this as well
so the first example we're going to look
at is phosphorus with five chlorines
around it phosphorus is pretty large and
it has chlorine which is a fairly small
electronegative atom around it and has
five of them around it so we'll put our
phosphorus in the middle and we'll put
our five chlorines around it now we need
to count valence electrons because we
need to draw Lewis structures so
phosphorus brings five valence electrons
to the game the chlorines each have
seven and there five of them so we have
40 altogether phosphorus we think wants
eight it would for a complete octet also
chlorine wants eight and there five of
those so total if we have complete octet
Swee need 48 electrons 48 minus 40 the
number needed for the complete octet
minus the number of valence electrons
gives you eight bonding electrons so
we're gonna assign two per bond up to
eight and there we go now does that look
like a good lewis structure to you yeah
it's pretty obvious that there's
something wrong here so this is just not
this is not gonna work out we're not
going to add chlorine to another
chlorine because they don't like to do
that halogens really like to be terminal
so that's not going to work so we got to
use some extra electrons and make a new
bond so we we need to have five bonds so
that means we need to use ten you need
to have ten bonding electrons and when
we borrow another two we can make our
another bond and now we had 40 we've now
used 10 we had no choice we had to use
10 so we have 30 lone pairs and we have
five chlorines that all want six lone
pair electrons to complete their octet
and six times five is thirty so this
works out beautifully so this is a very
happy structure now phosphorus is okay
it's
it has an N equals three it's okay being
expanded and chlorines very happy so the
bottom line is they're certain there's
certain kinds of elements that you can
expand they can have more than an octet
they can have five bonds others carbon
no carbons not going to have five bonds
but phosphorus is okay so some things
can be expanded some things can't be
expanded so you have to think about what
the expansion would do and whether that
would be allowed let's do one more
example chromium with four oxygens minus
2 charge
we see chromium over here Scott D
electrons let's see what happens so here
we have our skeleton structure we put
chromium in the middle and our four
oxygens around it now we have a bracket
around it with a little - to note the
nut - - because it has a charge on it
don't forget about the charge and now we
need to see how many valence electrons
so chromium is going to bring six so we
can look at where it is in the periodic
table one two three four five six our
oxygens up here also have six valence
electrons and don't forget about the
charge on the molecule so when it's
minus two you have to add two electrons
it has extra two electrons so add those
in which gives you a total of 32 what do
you need for your octet so eight for the
chromium four times eight for all the
four oxygens we need 40 then we can take
our 40-32 and we have eight bonding
electrons that seems good - per bond
we'll put those on then we'll see if we
have any lone pairs and we do 32 minus 8
gives us 24 the oxygens are going to
want six and there four of them so that
just looks awesome
so maybe this doesn't need to expand
let's see what do we do to test this
experiments or if we don't have a lab we
do formal charge
yes that's easier to do in the classroom
all right so we'll calculate a formal
charge
chromium brought six valence electrons
it has no lone pairs it has eight eight
half of eight bonding electrons or four
bonds plus two oxygens have six valence
electrons six lone pairs one bond so
half of two or minus one so the total
charge here because you have four of
those plus 2 is minus two so that's okay
but this has a pretty big charge
distribution everything has a formal
charge on it and that doesn't make
molecules very happy they want formal
charges of zero maybe plus or minus one
but this is a lot of formal charge so
maybe we can do better and as someone
said someone else did an experiment and
yep they're not single bonds so in the
experiment showed that it's somewhere
between a single and double bond so this
is not the right lewis structure and one
of the tip-offs could be whenever you
see plus to make sure there's not
another possible structure where - do so
you can make double bonds here and if
you do that and calculate the formal
charge then on chromium it had six no
lone pairs but now it has six bonds so
it has a formal charge of zero the
double bonded oxygen had had brought six
valence electrons they have four lone
pairs and they have half of four bonding
electrons now there's zero and the two
single oxygens here are still minus one
there are two of them so that equals the
minus two but this has much less charge
separation you have lots of zeros you
don't have any more things with charges
of
- but this is not done what else do we
need here
we need resonance structures that's
right because I just put the Bott double
bonds here I could have put them there
or maybe somewhere else and you can tell
me how many other structures you need to
complete this
all right ten more seconds
yeah this is a good one I think that
helps when you do it in a team everyone
sees different ones so there actually
are four other ones you can try to write
that out and prove it to yourself there
are four other structures you can do and
you need all of those to get the correct
structure so this these structures are
corrected is a resonance structure
there's less formal charge separation
okay so that's the end of Lewis
structures and we're going to talk about
shapes and molecules on Friday and
problem set is due on Friday and it has
lots of lewis structures in it so don't
leave it to the last minute
you